And congratulations on your new role.
We, of course, know that you started yesterday
and we were just talking, uh, amongst ourselves that, um,
we welcome, uh, any comments that we, you may, uh, want
to talk about the broader context, uh, of, of, of the en
of the environment, uh, of the challenges
of the Reserve Bank, of its operational.
We are not going to, uh, uh, stick you to the financial year
of, uh, June 30th, 2025.
So, um, if you do have any, uh, introductory comments, uh,
we, we certainly welcome them.
Uh, and, and, uh, feel free to, um, extend those, uh,
we're not gonna be so welcome.
Thank you, chair. Um, and committee. Thank you very much.
Um, uh,
and in terms of opening remarks,
the Reserve Bank has achieved a great deal towards the
delivery of our mandate functions this year,
including navigating challenging economic conditions.
So, I'm sure this committee is very aware.
Number one, consumer price inflation has fallen back
to within the monetary policies target band of one to three.
Uh, the bank has also made importantly,
significant progress against our
financial stability mandate.
We strengthened our regulatory
and supervisory approach through the implementation
of the Deposit Takers Act 2023, including the publication
of decisions on the core standards for deposit takers.
And we will be announcing, uh, I'm happy to tell you, uh,
before the year end, our decisions on the
core standards for capital.
We also launched the deposit compensation scheme midyear,
and a really important initiative, uh,
with enhanced financial stability by increasing, uh,
the protection to individuals from the failure
of any individual bank up
to a hundred thousand dollars per institution.
We all also instigated our cash community trials.
Uh, this is a really important piece
of work in providing us insights in
how we can provide solutions to community cash issues,
particularly in rural areas.
I do, however, chair acknowledge, uh,
there have been a number of challenges for the Reserve Bank.
This year. We've had resignations
of two governors and a chair.
Uh, we responded
by conducting an extremely robust governor appointment
process with over 300 candidates identified, uh,
and down to a long list of 30, uh, and eventually five.
And then we have sitting on my right, our new governor, uh,
this period of, uh, challenge, uh, has, has required, um,
the board to provide additional support
to management throughout the year, uh, which we have done.
Uh, but once again, we feel moving into 2026
and with our new governor in place, the board will be able
to get back to doing what a good board does.
Uh, the bank, uh, has also embarked, uh, uh,
as has been well covered in the media on an organizational
change and restructure process
that's reduced our head count count, uh, from 688 employees
to 554, a reduction of 134 people.
Um, however, I'm delighted to be able to introduce, uh, uh,
to the committee, our new Reserve bank Governor, Dr.
Anna Breman, on her second day. Uh, I will hand over to Dr.
Braman soon, uh, for her
to make some remarks to the committee.
Um, Dr. Braman, of course, you may be aware,
was previously the first deputy governor
of the Swedish Rex Bank
and brings strong central banking expertise
through her extensive experience.
Joining us also today, uh, are members
of our Reserve Bank executive leadership team.
On my left, I have Kate McCain, assistant Governor
for Enterprise Services,
and John McDermott, assistant Governor for operations.
Also on hand, should we all need them.
Uh, Karen Silk, who you would've heard from last week, uh,
and Angus McGregor,
who is acting assistant governor for financial stability.
So, with that, welcome to day two, Anna. Thank you.
Thank you, Roger. Uh, and Maria Na, chair and Committee.
I am delighted to have the opportunity, uh,
to be here today, uh, on my second day,
like you pointed out.
Um, and I want to listen to you and answer your questions.
My priority in this few weeks
before Christmas will be to meet with my team internally,
but also with key external stakeholders such as yourself.
The Third Bank of New Zealand is an excellent institution,
and that is known and it's well regarded globally.
As the chair said, reserve Bank has shown resilience
in a challenging environment, both globally and internally.
The bank staff are loyal and dedicated,
and they work hard to enable prosperity
and economic wellbeing for all New Zealanders.
Key focus for the bank under my leadership, will be
to stay laser focused on our core mandate, and that is low
and stable inflation, a stable financial system,
and the safe and efficient payment system.
And importantly, that includes ensuring
that cash is available to all New Zealanders.
As we head into 2026, transparency, accountability
and clear communication will be our focus to maintain trust
and credibility, uh, with New Zealanders.
The Reserve Bank does rank high in international rankings
of transparency, but there is more to be done.
So to conclude, I just want to stress
that I very much look forward, uh,
to having a productive relationship with the committee.
Oh, thank you very much. Thank you.
And can I just acknowledge you, uh, Roger Finlay
for your elevation to chair in August, uh,
after being our deputy chair.
Uh, so congratulations to that.
And of course to, uh, mem new members of the board
and new members of the Monetary Policy Committee.
So, I'm gonna go to, uh, the Honorable Barbara Edmonds,
Uh, and welcome, um, governor to, uh, both New Zealand
and to your new, uh, problem school.
Be nice to today, today,
but we have a very good respectful relationship
here across the tables.
Um, so probably these questions are probably
best for, um, Mr.
Chair, if that's okay.
Uh, Roger and it,
and it's really, it has been quite a tumultuous period
for the Reserve Bank, and we,
and we welcome your comments around Mr.
Stability and focus on, on your actual core business.
Um, so Mr. Chair, my, my question goes back
to the original funding bid,
which was within this particular period.
So the original funding bid was for I think,
more than $1 billion over the five years, uh,
which treasury then obviously had significant concerns
around, or significant value for money concerns.
And, and then eventually when the government didn't agree to
that 1 billion agreed to, um,
it's probably there's a lot of perception out there
that the board dropped the ball in relation
to both the funding bid
and then obviously subsequent actions that have resulted
with both the governor resigning
and the board chair resigning.
Um, why, uh,
why did you approve the $1 billion funding bid in the first
place then just to subed
or, you know, step back to the seven 50?
Well, um, there's a very easy, uh, part to the answer,
which is, in my experience, commercially, um,
any long initiative budget process starts high
and ends lower, not the other way around.
Yeah. But I'm not for a minute suggesting that we sort
of threw a speculative billion dollars in the
year and then settled lower.
The detailed answer is, uh, in the initial phases,
so we're now, uh, 14 months
before the due date of the new five year agreement.
Mm-hmm. We were getting oral communications from Treasury
and others that the baseline would be 24 25 annual spend
minus the requested and suggested 7.5%.
With that guidance, we started shaping up our very first
templates of what it looked like.
Yeah. The board became involved when
we wanted more granularity of,
rather than just gross spend,
we wanted more granularity in terms of the divisional spend.
Mm-hmm. And then in our third iteration,
we started looking at what does it spend per function,
per statutory responsibility
that split it along outcome lines.
So it was a very long process.
Um, at the end,
and leading to the second part of your question, uh,
it was absolutely apparent that our then governor truly felt
that the billion dollars was the, um, was the, um,
required amount to run the bank and all its functions.
The board in further discussions with treasury
and with our own internal staff, perceived
and realized a lower number.
So then as we got very close to the due date, um,
in I believe March, uh, of 2025, we were shaping
around Fox seven 50 number.
So, so it's been quite clearly reported that
that was ultimately that and,
and the review of the capital requirement rules were the
reason why the, the governor did resign in the end.
Um, in relation to the functions
or the work programs, what has the bank had to change
as a result of the initial funding bid not being approved?
So, um, you know, what, what programs have you had
to postpone or cancel as a result of that?
And also, how can you, how can you assure the public that
and give the confidence that the bank has the expertise
that it needs in order to, to actually achieve its functions
or to actually meet its functions, given
that turnover in staff? Yeah.
Uh, look, absolutely.
We knew at our core,
and I touched on in my opening address,
are statutory requirements.
Our, our big rocks of what we need to deliver.
Uh, we're at the core of the way we reshaped the business.
And then as we got deeper
and deeper into budgeting exercise,
we realized a lot could be ca gained by the reordering
of our priorities.
So if, if you try
and identify them, what are, what are the things you were
doing that you are not now doing?
There aren't that many.
It's the pace with which we intended to do them,
and the granularity
and the depth of some
of the more peripheral activities we were doing, uh,
you know, how, how deep we were gonna go in those areas.
Uh, do we do a stage one approach rather than a
full commissioning of something.
So it really was, uh,
I thought it was an excellent budgeting exercise led
by our former chair, Neil, quickly, um, and,
and we, I I hand on heart.
I think there might be two or three things that were on our,
uh, on our, um, uh, statement of performance, um, yeah.
That we're not now doing.
John, could you give further granularity on that?
Yeah, sure. I mean, the, one
of our key design principles when we entered into the
restructure was to prioritize our resourcing
around our central banking functions, again, to make sure
that we were, we had sufficient resources allocated
to those, uh, key output classes and, uh, mandate areas.
So in, in terms of the restructure, we really focus looking
for savings across our support lines, uh,
support functions in the bank.
And that's where we've taken, uh, the largest, um,
I suppose, resource reductions or head count reductions.
Can you just give an example of, or,
or actually list what they are those support functions,
and what are the peripherals that the chair referenced?
Yeah. So our support functions are, are, are,
are categorized as, um, the functions we use across the bank
to enable sort of enterprise activities.
So technology, hr, uh, security, uh, finance.
Also, our communications area is another example.
Uh, the teams that look
after things like, uh, risk management and so forth.
And, sorry, um, one last question, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
Uh, Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, Roger.
Um, there will be a lot of cri criticism
of the board over the last year about both your handling
of both resignations funding.
There will be a lot of criticism in relation to that.
I'm just giving you an opportunity now.
Can you provide assurance to the New Zealand public
that the focus now, that the board
before that you stand by your decision board
as both the board member and as a now as board chair,
and provide assurance to the public now
around the board's capability in relation to
the oversight of the Reserve Bank?
I'm just giving you the opportunity to do that now. Mm-hmm.
Look, I wouldn't have taken the job if
I couldn't answer that question.
We have an excellent board, um, my board style for those
who might have worked with me.
They know I, I chair a board. I don't chair an organization.
We have extremely talented people.
We have a former governor
and Grant Spencer with Susan Patterson, who spent a nine
or 10 years on the electricity authority, very competent
and regulated space.
Byron Pepper, a 21 year veteran of Goldman Sachs.
Um, so, you know, it is a very capable board.
We're doing a lot of our work through board committees,
and we're powering up committees in case it, it it,
for an example, our brand new financial policy committee
that will come into effect early next year.
Uh, it was working yesterday on the capital review
and the capital settings that we'll be
announcing before Christmas.
I have total confidence in the fact
that the board can deliver the mandates
that the government has given us.
And, sorry, the supplementary to
that then is also in relation to the personnel changes.
I mean, it's quite significant.
They're two very senior financial leaders
in any other country.
It's, you know, it'll be significant.
Do you stand by your actions
and your statements in relation to that whole period as
to the resignation of both the board chair and the governor?
I can, I can stand by the fact that the process
as very senior officials left was robust, uh,
and all risks were assessed in, in the execution of those,
uh, uh, requirements.
What I can also say is, um,
to lose two governors, uh,
and a chair is indeed very unusual.
Mm-hmm. Um, but each case was totally different.
Uh, thanks to the help of the Ombuds office,
it's very clear Adrian's rationale
and the reasons why he left.
That's, that's in the public domain in terms of Christian
who left, um, you know, uh, he didn't get the role
as governor and he wants to pursue other opportunities.
And he goes with our very, very best wishes.
Um, I hope he won't mind me saying he fully participated in
the process to be governor.
Um, and,
and in the case of Neil, um,
Neil is a very good friend of mine.
I've worked with him all this time on the Reserve Bank.
He was an outstanding chairman, uh,
and he made his resignation decision on his own. Sorry.
Can I have one? Yeah, yeah. One more. That's okay.
So given you've, you've just confirmed
that Neil Quickly was a good friend of yours.
Yep. Are you very, are you confident
that there were no biases in relation to some
of the judgment calls that were made over the last period
where there was, there was no biases attached to that.
You mean, you've just confirmed he was a good friend. Yeah.
And we've, we've seen in other government agencies very
recently where good friendships get into the
way of good judgment. Ah,
Yeah. Um,
I just need to understand your, yeah. So
It's making your, you still feel confident
that the processes you followed were, were, um,
were followed appropriately despite
that you had a close relationship with the
Absolutely. Okay.
I've gotta stop here from Dan, but
What Thanks, Mr. Chair
on that. Um, it's on the subject of groupthink.
'cause I think that if you consider the other ministries
that I think my,
the Honorable member is referring to mm-hmm.
And there is equal criticisms of the Reserve Bank
around groupthink.
Yeah. What assurances can you give the public in New Zealand
that that level of groupthink will change,
will dissipate, and
that the Reserve Bank is entering a new era
of contestability of freedom of thought, uh,
and freedom of expression at the most
senior levels of the bank. Mm-hmm.
Very good. Well, well, let's start first
with the monetary policy committee.
We have three outstanding external members coming
to the other big rock of our A ambitions as the bank,
of course, is financial
stability for everyone in New Zealand.
We are now bringing two international experts onto
that financial new financial policy committee.
So in terms of group think, we have a lot
of external think coming into us.
Also, I've watched with great pride, the reshaping
of our senior leadership team.
They are four very talented professionals.
I don't see any group thing.
I see really strong debate as chair.
I get the opportunity to sit in some
of the internal committee meetings, and I see that debate.
So I don't see group.
Okay. That's loud and clear. Supplementary.
I could just bring you into this,
um, governor, and again, welcome.
Maybe you could just outline what is your style as a leader,
uh, in encouraging open, uh, debate
and being challenged, et cetera?
That's a great question.
And I think that, uh, in a central bank, it is imperative
that you have room to have a good discussion.
That people are allowed diversity and thought,
but it's not just that they're allowed it,
they should be encouraged.
And you can do it in different ways.
But one way that we can do it is to have through,
for example, the forecasting process
for the monetary policy decisions.
You can encourage people
to actually formally take the opposite view, just
to make sure that you get both sides of the argument.
Um, and throughout the years
that I worked in central banking, I've actually written, I,
I've given a speech where I discussed the risk
of group thinking central banking.
So I feel very comfortable that I will be able to encourage
a good discussion, both in terms of the financial, uh,
stability mandate, but also in terms
of the monetary policy mandate.
And research clearly shows
that the monetary policy decisions are better made when
they're done by a committee
where there is diversity of thought.
Okay. Thank you. I'm just go into one
more sub from Nancy Lou. Thank
You chair, and welcome.
Congratulations. Welcome to New Zealand.
Just to follow up on that,
if we are talking about better transparency,
allowing diversified opinions, will New Zealand's,
new Zealanders get to see the individual
decisions coming out from the NPS by the different members?
Because at the moment, we only see one overall decision,
but do we get to see the decisions about the
Yeah, this is a very good question as well.
And like, let me say that I would like to discuss this
with the Monetary Policy committee.
Okay. Given that it's my second day,
I have not had the chance to meet with all of them yet.
Good reminder. Yeah.
But this is one of the things that I will bring up
for discussion for sure.
Thank you, Kevin. Thank you. Thank you.
And of course, the establishment
of the Financial Policy Committee was attributed,
all attributed in your press release
to this fine committee here with our banking inquiry.
So we'd like to think we played a part in that.
Uh, Dr. Deborah Russell.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, just to follow on a little bit from
what Nancy was talking on,
in some ways I actually quite like
that we just get the committee decision,
not the individual ones.
'cause it takes us away from individual members being
lobbied and voted and things like that.
But that's a, a decision that you'll want
to take on board anyway, as others said, welcome.
And, um, uh, this committee has regular sessions
with the governor of the Reserve Bank,
and actually they're often the most interesting, um,
meetings we have as we get to talk about.
He can mix some policy with you.
Um, and so we're looking forward to that.
Um, February, I think will be our first one.
Uh, but, um, I think one of the things we'd like
to understand from you as we go into the next
monetary policy statement and so on, is, um, your view
of the relationship between fiscal policy
and monetary policy
and the role that you might see monetary policy having, um,
in terms of promoting economic growth and so on.
Just to get a little bit of a, a flavor from you as to
where you sit on those sorts of issues.
And
Yeah. Thank
you. Uh, that is a very difficult question.
Sorry. Uh, no, no, it's perfectly fine.
You should ask difficult questions. That's your job.
Um, no, but this is the case.
Uh, our mandate is very clear
that we should focus on keeping inflation low and stable.
Um, and that is what we actually can achieve
with monetary policy using our main tool, which is the OCR.
Uh, then of course, uh,
the overall development in the general economy is also
affected by fiscal policy,
but fiscal policy is responsibility
of Parliament and the government.
So all I really want to stress today is
that our focus will be on inflation,
but growth of course also affects how inflation involves.
But what we can really achieve
as the monetary policy committee
and that we are mandated to do is to keep inflation low
and stable, taking in consideration
what's happening at the overall.
So thank you. Um, uh, I, I appreciate that.
That's the Reserve Bank's mandate is the
emphasis on inflation until quite recently, um,
the Reserve Bank had a dual mandate around, um,
what do we call it, maximum sustainable employment
or something like that as well.
Um, so, uh,
and that's obviously, um, well, we all regard it
as being important for people to be in jobs.
Um, can you say what sort of role you see
that it's now no longer a dual mandate,
but obviously it's something
that will be important to the Reserve Bank.
Do you have any views on the relationship between employment
and inflation and the pace that we can use both
to promote growth?
I think what I'm trying to avoid is trying
to say too much ahead
of the next monetary policy meeting in February, given
that there was just a meeting last week,
and I was not part of that meeting.
But let me phrase it like this, that everything
that goes on in the economy, uh,
can affect inflation in different ways.
So of course, the labor market is important,
and we will clearly, uh, follow the labor market,
wage growth, uh, productivity, all of these factors.
Uh, but again, the core mandate is to keep inflation low
and stable, taking consideration the overall
performance of the economy. I think
One of the, um, ongoing concerns we have, um,
as members of the Labor Party, um, is around employment.
Um, it sort of, I we're deeply concerned that, um,
employment gets sacrificed in order to keep inflation down.
It is an ongoing concern for us.
Dr. Russell, If I could, you know,
when you had the monetary policy committee here last week,
I was very pleased that they talked in detail
with the committee about the,
the so-called box in the report about,
we were talking about a low hire, low fire environment.
So even though employment's not specifically in the remit
anymore, uh, I'm sure the experts
and PhDs around, it's impossible
to think about inflation without considering unemployment.
And there's the evidence in the NPS last week, you know,
it's quite a detail based on employment conditions.
Oh, I agree. But I like, I, I totally agree.
I I do not, I do understand the economic relationship,
I guess, um, uh, in, in, in terms of us.
I know other people, we actually do
want people to be in jobs.
It's a hard thing to do if inflation is pushing
us in a different direction.
Anyway, that's a We'll see how, how,
Yeah. We've got a sub
from, uh, Dan. Oh, no.
Oh, you didn't have a sub. Okay, Barbara.
So, so then really just talking about jobs
and the restructure that you've had to do, result
of the funding, uh, decrease.
Uh, uh, a note on your responses to questions,
I think was 39, uh, roles were made redundant
or were changed as a result of the review.
Please, you're welcome to correct me if I'm wrong.
I think it's page 47 of the, um, sessions to the committee.
So what was the total cost of the restructure,
and can you break and
how much was the redundancy payments paid out to staff?
Yeah, I can, I can answer that.
So, um, obviously in our, uh, annual report
and in our questions, we were reporting that as of 30 June,
our restructure actually spanned through
to the 13th of October.
So if I may, I'll use the,
the total numbers that we reached as
Of October. Okay.
We're gonna, we're gonna go to a primary
Oh, oh, sorry.
Yeah. So that was, uh, there were 68 redundancies, um,
completed by 13th of October at a cost
of $2.6 million in those redundancies.
Okay. Thank you. My chance, uh, Chloe Sawman,
Thank you very much, um, Moreno
and welcome, uh, to the role.
Mm-hmm. I guess I had wanted to tease out a little bit of
what Dr. Deborah Russell was alluding to,
and it should actually just be put on record for everybody,
that we did actually ask the former Reserve Bank governor at
the time that the dual mandate was whittled down to
that one mandate that RBNZ told us that
that actually wasn't gonna change all too much practically
in terms of how you approached the role.
Yeah. Can I just confirm that that is still the case?
It's an economic question.
I think it's impossible to just consider inflation in
isolation without thinking about employment
Conditions. I guess further to
that point, over the last few years,
and FEC, particularly during COVID
and through unconventional monetary policy, uh, tried
to raise the alarm about distributional impacts
of particularly unconventional monetary policy without, uh,
intervening or mitigating fiscal policy.
Uh, I guess as far as that goes, is RBNZ still going to be
concerning itself with distributional impacts
with particularly monetary policy?
And what can we expect that to look like moving forward,
especially under new leadership?
Should I answer? Yeah.
No, but I think it's important that we look at,
Uh, distribution of incomes, of course.
Mm-hmm. But the mandate of the rrb NZ, is
to keep inflation low and stable.
And we have to remember that high inflation hurts everyone,
but it particularly hurts households, low incomes.
Yeah. And there's a lot of research on this,
and you can look at the data,
and it's also true that inflation is high.
It eats real wages for households,
and that means that they will spend less,
and that means that the economy will perform less,
and it means that employment growth will also be weaker.
So that's why I think it's reasonable for us to
focus on our mandate.
Mm-hmm. But taking into consideration, of course,
how the labor market evolves.
Mm-hmm. But in the long run,
you will not have a strong labor market
unless inflation is low and stable.
And I guess, and please just please remember
how hurtful high inflation is for households.
Totally. And I guess as a kind of counterfactual,
but a very live example of that, I mean,
a ruthless application of that sole mandate
and of taking inflation low was, uh,
expressed in the sentiments of, uh,
the former Reserve Bank Governor when under questioning from
me at the end of 2022, he said that the RBNZ was trying
to manufacture a recession in order to bring down inflation.
Yeah. Um, is that a kind of frankness
that we can expect from you?
I think the Reserve Bank, uh, under my leadership
will always know exactly what our mandate is,
but we will have a view over the economy that we aim
to support a healthy and strong and growing economy,
but keeping inflation low and stable in that economy.
I guess to that effect, uh, with fresh ice, uh,
you may be aware of the fact
that house prices have been quite a substantial topic, uh,
particularly for this committee
and when we are looking at the impacts of monetary policy,
but also obviously, uh, fiscal policy as well.
So how do you conceive of the role
or the place of the housing market
and the ostensible recovery
that we're currently undertaking? Yeah.
Uh, I have, uh, looked at all the data, of course.
Um, and house prices did grow considerably
during the COVID period, and then they fallen.
It's different across different parts of the country now.
It's stabilizing somewhat.
It is very important to household in terms of their wealth,
in terms of construction.
So it has a large impact on the New Zealand economy.
Ideally, you would want less substantial swings in house
prices over time, and
that construction needs better meets the de
demand of households.
But we know that this is complicated and difficult.
It is in many countries, uh,
but it does have an, a large impact on the economy,
how, how prices involve.
Mm-hmm. And that's something obviously
that the Reserve Bank is following. Okay. Final
Up. Yeah, I mean, I guess
part of what my line
of questioning is trying
to underscore is the ongoing challenge that we have,
particularly as a committee, to try
and communicate, especially to members of the public,
how blunt an instrument monetary policy is, uh,
and what the role of fiscal policy is,
particularly when it comes to softening, um, you know,
those distributional impacts and otherwise.
So what I'm trying to get out of you
is just some articulation of how frank
and how clear we can expect
that you will be about the limitations of monetary policy
and potentially where, I don't know,
government has to take responsibility.
Well, I really think that one of my roles together
with everyone at the Reserve Bank is to focus on, uh,
explaining our core mandate,
but also being very clear in our communication.
So I will take what you're saying with me,
and I will take that into the next year
and look at, you know, both in terms of the reset
that we do, but also how we communicate to the wider public,
because it is important. Thank you.
Okay. Uh, thank you. Now I'm gonna
go to Nancy Lou for primary.
I've got a lot of primaries here, so we, um,
push as many through as we can.
Okay. Uh, I'll group all my primary
and supplementary into one question then.
Um, this is about the workforce.
Um, just noting, uh, the the current structure and all that,
but also noting, um, the,
at the height in March, 2025, at about 778 in head count,
that is increased almost 400% in the last 10 years,
or over 200% doubled in the last five years.
Even with the restructure of happening at the moment,
we are still very, very large in terms of headcount numbers,
which means salary costs,
which means operational costs for entire bank.
So beyond the operational savings that we are achieving
with the restructuring, what are the benefits
and values that the bank will achieve from the restructuring
with better productivity, better efficiency,
new ways of working?
And maybe potentially even just
slowing down a little bit more
Quick question, but No, no, it is big.
So I'll start at the beginning and,
and the beginning is when one talks about our current
headcount level is large.
Mm-hmm. It's in contrast to what Yeah.
And, and, and I always, you know, as I speak to people,
remind that Cosby New Zealand are a small country.
We have this beautiful thing called a
universal central bank.
We do it all. We do what a PRA does,
what the Reserve Bank of Australia does.
Mm-hmm. What the insurance council, you know, we,
we regulate insurance banks money, we money in cash
and society, it financial policy, monetary policy,
financial stability.
It's a huge universe of work.
Um, so when we look at a broader
and start combining an A PRA with an RBA
or a, it doesn't look such a big number.
Implicit in your question though, is,
you know, why has it gone up?
Respect your number 400%.
Um, the bank is doing a lot more, Ms.
Luke, you know, uh,
all our work on the new Deposit takers act was all new
deposit compensation scheme from scratch.
We never had one. We were one of the few OECD nations
that did not protect depositors.
Mm-hmm. Um, that comes with, with, with headcount.
Finally, I say, uh, you know, super question,
uh, efficiency.
It's now in our remit.
It's, you know, uh, uh, do we have regard to the remit?
Of course we do. You know, some people
say, do you have regard to the remit?
Or it's just a remit. You know, we think about the remit
and every board paper in every discussion, we think about
that remit and efficiency is buried in the remit.
And we will do everything in our power
with our reduced resources to be efficient.
Indeed, the board on the 11th of December is receiving a
whole new piece of work on our ways of working
and embedding further efficiencies into our organization.
Will that be made available publicly?
Um, you know, we don't have plans to release
that particular paper, but it's certainly something
that we can, we can start to talk about more.
So people have an idea of good where
and how we're gonna get these
efficiency measures in our organization. Ask
Us up on that. Okay.
Up from, So, so around efficiency savings, um,
just noting that the total workforce head count
for your enterprise services has had a 48% reduction,
I just wanna make sure, like, so what are you, what are your
strategies to ensure that that risk of
that quite a large reduction, um,
and enterprise services won't put anything else at risk in
relation to the analysis or the systems that the bank uses
to analyze the data that it needs to do? Well,
You've got the person per perfect person here.
Yeah. So I, I'm the
assistant governor of the enterprise area.
So what we are is we're a collection
of essentially corporate services across the bank,
covering things like legal, ministerials,
comms strategy, accountability.
So, you know, really the backbone of the organization as,
uh, my colleague explained, uh,
we've done a targeted approach to reducing
where our headcount is.
So our operational side, the bank has reduced the most,
but what we've done is do it in a targeted way.
So we really are clear and ensure
that we meet the requirements of each
of the important functions that sit under these banners.
So, you know, we're confident that we've got those rights so
that yes, they are reduced,
but they still are going
to meet the expectations of each function.
So have you now got actual full-time employees in your
ministerial services team, noting
that earlier in the year you were using contractors?
Yep. So we do have some full-time employees
and we are still using some contractors.
The shape of that chain team has changed quite a bit.
Um, and yes, we will, you know, move towards a path of,
of hopefully recruiting full-time people into the team.
Sorry, and John, really quickly,
because you did say,
was it 2.6 million in redundant payments over
how many individuals was that?
There were 68 redundancies.
68 redundancies. And, and that 2.6 is for all 68
or 68 got a redundancy payment, or was it only 19?
Uh,
We're different reporting dates for the different numbers.
As the 13th of October,
there are 68 redundancies in the cost of those redundancies
For $2.6 million.
It's a really quick sub. Okay.
Just quick sub and we're gonna move on. Just really quick,
Sub, how many people are, um, serving the ministerial work
directly employed now doing ministerials?
So in, in terms of that team, we've got,
our structure is gonna be a team of four,
but noting that this is a shared services team covering OAS
as well as governance as well.
So, um, yeah, so we've got roughly four, which is, um,
which, you know, a couple of those headcount share across
both, uh, minister OIA as well. Sure. Thank
You. Okay. Uh,
deputy Chair
Hamilton, Uh, thank you chair.
Um, look, uh, echo. Congratulations again, Dr.
Anna and Roger in your roles.
Um, look, really exciting time, I think, to have a reset
with the board and also
where New Zealand's poised my question's really around,
um, competition.
And on the back of, um, our inquiry,
which you acknowledge in your report.
Um, I just, I appreciate some of those things, uh,
are pending the capital review requirements.
Um, you've already launched some of the SA changes
to open access to your,
your accounts open banking government made it official
for banks as of yesterday.
So I'd be really keen on where you see some of
that happening and,
and how your impact's gonna influence competition across the
sector and the fintechs.
And, and we're gonna invite you back in February
or March too to talk specifically about that.
So, um,
It's not many sleeps that each year
until we will be announcing our, um, view on capital.
Also, in your question is the linkage between
capital and competition.
It's really interesting as you go around.
And we had, as you know,
three international experts who helped us now work.
The literature is not, um, it's not absolute.
There's some sources that would say
increase capital, increases competition.
Uh, I don't think I'm giving away too many secrets to say
that we believe as a board who will be making this decision,
that our new capital settings will enhance competition,
particularly, uh, through looking at our proportionality
through, uh, our tier one, tier two,
tier three institutions.
But beyond that deputy chair i'd, I'd like
to just hold fire. Mm
Sure. And just if
I could open banking, um, you, you, you've been,
uh, publicly stated as proponents of it.
There was a big government announcement yesterday.
Is there anything further you can say on, on the impact
that might have on how that might shape up with switching?
I think thank you would be good, uh, to say, um, you know,
we have been, uh, going on about open banking
and, uh, we're thrilled it's here.
And I'm sure someone more qualified
to me can talk about the intricacies.
But, um, we're very pleased it's happened. Great.
Thank you. And again, we'll be inviting you to come back
and talk specifically on your response to
that, to the banking inquiry.
Uh, first quarter next year, I'm gonna go to Dr.
Uh, Megan Ward, the honorable,
Uh, thank you and welcome.
Lovely to have you here on, on day two.
And congratulations, Mr. Chairman on your, your new role.
Thank you. Um, colleagues have alluded to the fact that one
of the briefings this committee really values is the
quarterly monetary policy statement updates that we get.
I think one of the really consistent themes that has come
through in those mpss is the, um,
uncertainty and volatility, um,
around understanding the global context
and the impact that's gonna have on our domestic economy.
Um, you come from being, um, engaged in other economies
and just wonder what you think in terms of the ability
of central banks around the world.
'cause this isn't limited to New Zealand to be able
to get some more certainty, um,
into the advice they're giving in terms
of the go global context, or whether
or not that's something that's only going to increase
as we go into the next 12 and 24 month period.
I think that the global environment currently, um,
if you look at the macroeconomic environment,
it has been performing a bit better than expected, given
how much uncertainty we've had over the past few years.
That unfortunately doesn't mean
that the un uncertainty is going away.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so I do believe that we will face, um,
a global environment that is characterized by uncertainties
and that we have to deal with them.
And a small open economy like New Zealand will always be
affected at what's happening around the world.
So that is why for me
and my colleagues at the Reserve Bank,
having a strong international network is very important.
And in my role, I will travel to international meetings
to meet with other people from the Central Bank community.
'cause that's a good way of, um, collecting information,
discussing what is happening, comparing challenges.
Um, and that's one of the things that we will encourage.
We don't have to travel, uh, in person all the times.
We can also take a lot of, um, uh, video meetings
and video conference, et cetera.
But it is important for us, uh, to be,
have a strong global network. And we do have that.
Thank you. Okay. We're gonna go stop there for,
for Dan, but thank you, governor, you've come from Europe
and, uh, you know, it's very interesting times,
um, economically in Europe.
I'm just keen to get your sense.
We've talked about the interplay
between monetary policy and fiscal policy.
The elephant in the room internationally is the amount
of debt burden that a lot
of advanced economies are carrying.
And previous NPS statements have alluded to
the risk associated with
that debt burden, uh, for New Zealand.
I'm wanting to know,
and just you, you've got an open chance here, um,
what your views are on that debt burden globally.
And, um, you know,
how a small open economy like New Zealand needs
to respond from a monetary policy sense.
Um, so again, I'm being a little bit cautious
'cause I don't want to get ahead of the next February
meeting, but I can say that, um,
I read the last monetary policy report, of course,
it's very well written as well argued,
and it does highlight the risk of debt burden globally.
Um, I think that this is something that
we will unfortunately, again, continue to live with that,
that's a risk to the global economy.
Uh, and it means that, um,
fiscal responsibility is important
for all countries. Mm-hmm.
Quickly, Mr. Berg, could I just add, uh, in,
in our, one of our, uh,
financial stability reviews earlier this year,
we did a very detailed piece on, um, the risks of
a major earthquake followed by tsunami.
And we modeled it and we had great help from treasury,
and then treasury took it on into their
other set piece work.
It's a big number. And somewhere in the answer
to your question is, our debt capacity needs
to be ever mindful of the cost.
It would co, it would, it would take
to reconstruct a a large bundle of uninsured, uh,
and underinsured assets in New Zealand.
And so I think
that plays into the whole debt comparison regime globally.
Okay. I've gotta stop here from,
So, um, governor, our, um, new Zealand's, um,
crown debt is sitting at around about 41%
of GDP at the moment.
Um, do you regard that as risky or about right
or could go lower?
Would you have a view on that
as a, compared to other economies?
I think if you look globally, uh, it's not a high level.
Uh, but I think I also come, uh, you know, from a country
with a relatively low level of, um, debt,
but small open economies, uh,
if they are fiscally responsible, uh, they have many,
many more options in terms
of also investing in their future. Mm.
Okay. Okay. I'm gonna go to a primary from Robert White.
Oh,
Just about fell asleep waiting anyway.
Um,
um, who'd you say Governor?
Uh, high inflation hurts, low income earners.
And, um, I, I see being a coastal person brought up,
brought up on the coast, near the sea, uh, kayak's job is
to ensure that they can see, uh, the,
or the horizon, um, see what the weather, um, uh,
is doing, uh, waves, tides and things like that.
And I see the Reserve Bank doing the same thing
and ensuring the safety of the people
who live near the coast in terms of it's, uh, in terms
of inflation, interest rates, uh, lending flows, um,
and all those types of things.
My question is, now that the Reserve Bank has gone
to a single mandate, um, we have seen huge
increase in unemployment,
and I can say huge in terms of Maori unemployment,
uh, at 10%.
Um, do you have any, um,
any policies in your mind or,
or any ideas about how you counter that whilst, uh, having
to manage inflation, uh,
but also trying to ensure that, uh,
unemployment doesn't rise at the same time
because, um, it's hurting low income people,
and according to these numbers,
it's hurting Maori more than non Maori.
And I just want to know what your ideas are,
if you have any ideas around some of the fi uh, some
of the settings that you may have to counter
or to deal with that particular issue.
Thank you. I think what we will see, uh,
in the near future, uh, that is that the rate cuts
that have been done over this past year from last year,
that will improve, improve growth in New Zealand,
and we'll see stronger employment growth as well.
Um, I think it's important, uh, like you pointed out,
to acknowledge how much inflation hurts everyone,
but in particular low income households.
And unless we get inflation to stay low
and stable going forward, um, then households,
purchasing powers will not come back.
Households demand for goods and services will not come back.
So we will need to focus on keeping inflation low
and stable in order to also see a stronger labor market.
Just to sub on that, and there's probably a question
for people at this table.
Uh, how much of a high priority is, uh,
at a board level, um, at a, at your level,
and also at your level in regards to, um,
because the subs will probably be built off?
Um, that particular question,
this is gonna be a short question.
Mm-hmm. How high is the TT ang in regards
to the way you operate as a board
and as a bank in terms of the people you employ?
Uh, how, how important is that
and how, how much of a high priority is that for all
of you across this table?
I can answer that if I may.
And so for us, it's an incredibly
important part of our work.
Um, uh,
and that spans across actually all parts of our mandate.
So in terms of price stability, understanding
what happens in the Maori economy, um, being a very big
and important part of New Zealand's economy,
um, is incredibly important.
So, you know, we think about it there, uh,
from a financial stability perspective as well,
thinking about, um, you know, access to, you know, services
and, uh, access to, um, you know,
an inclusive financial system, um,
that people can trust and participate in.
Incredibly important. And, you know, that flows through
as well to other parts.
For example, thinking about cash as infrastructure
that serves all of New Zealand's.
So for me, this is an, remains an incredibly important part
of our work program, underpinned by a commitment to Titi,
uh, that was made by the board a couple of years ago.
So it remains front and center
For us, And the board is still,
So one of the first things we did,
and thank you for the question, is we issued our first ever
Treaty of Wang's statement,
and then working with my former board colleague,
Roia Higgins and others, we wanted to make
that a living document within our organization affecting our
employment thoughts, our, uh, exactly some
of the stuff Kate's talking about,
our financial inclusion work.
Um, so, uh, I, it's paramount.
I think we're very proud, uh, we're very proud of our name.
Just on that. And I think good segue in some
of the comments that you made.
Um, governor, do you ma have always had an issue with access
to capital, um, having huge own, uh, land ownership,
um, and, and not having the ability to access capital
to be able to enter into the economic space of the country.
Do you have any, have you have given any thoughts
or even at, at the board level, um, any thoughts about
how to make that a lot easier?
Because I understand the,
the last governor was working in a, in that space to,
to ensure that there was better access to capital for Maori,
uh, when Maori assets, um, will you continue that work?
And do you have any i of your own ideas about
how Maori can access capital?
What I like to stress, uh,
and I'm being mindful
that this is my second day in the office now, uh,
and I will meet with our Maori chief advisor tomorrow, um,
because there I will, um, ensure
that I understand the culture
and the language better going forward,
but I think it's very important that relates to one
of the questions we got before, uh, to focus on competition
to ensure good access to capital for all New Zealanders.
So competition in the banking market, uh, allowing
for open banking, uh, will be one important questions also,
and not least, uh, for the Maori community.
And again, it played a big part, uh, uh, its own chapter
and, um, in our banking inquiry,
which we will talk further about, uh,
uh, first quarter next year. Dr. David Wilson.
Thank you chair. Uh, welcome Dr. Braman and Roger.
Um, I had two questions,
but I will, uh, let you know what the first one was,
and you don't have to answer it.
The second one I will ask.
Um, the large scale asset purchase program,
which I would regard as failure, um,
was described in the audit as alternative monetary policy.
Don't have to answer that question as a philosophical,
no ideological one that I discussed at a later date.
So, um, the real question you mentioned, um, Dr. Raymond,
that, uh, it's a challenging global environment
and I would agree wholeheartedly.
Also, you mentioned that one of your goals will be a safe
and efficient payment system.
Um, currently we are facing organized crime
and investment for substantial threat
and present in New Zealand as it is globally.
Uh, these are really significant issues.
Um, and thank you Roger, for mentioning the deposit takers,
uh, policy, but I note it does not apply to scam victims.
Yeah. Um, does the bank believe they're addressing the
mitigation of anti-money laundering, counter finance
terrorism with the banks in an effective and timely manner?
And that's a wider question because your second day Yes.
I have previously worked on, um, anti-money laundering
and, and um, uh, terrorism financing, which is a
large problem globally, exactly like you state.
Um, and I think it's important that we continue that work.
It will address, it will raise some difficult question.
'cause one thing
that I stress in my introductory remarks is access to cash
for the whole economy.
But there's also risks in terms of illegal activities.
Uh, so it's both in terms of the digital economy,
it can be used in terms of, um, illegal activities,
but actually also, uh, cash.
And that's something that central banks
should be focusing on.
And they should be very aware of the difficulties that
that entails for the economy.
But further than that, I can't go on my secondary.
Karen, would you like to add anything? You can talk to,
Could we just, oh, you
just have to come to the microphone.
Thank you. Even a pitched up.
If we can just get close to it. Thank you.
Got it. Um, Angus McGregor, um, responsible
for financial stability and of course we,
we have responsibility
for anti-money laundering supervision of our banking sector.
Um, we are very focused on these issues
and, uh, talking to the, the sector, um,
all the time on this, of course, we should be mindful
that those responsibilities are moving shortly
to the Department of Internal Affairs
as they take on responsibility as supervisor of, um,
you know, all of the sectors.
Um, most likely during the course of, uh, 2026.
Okay. Thank, thank you. Um, I've got a question.
Uh, the aspiring mortgage holders
and actual mortgage holders, uh, now have
to wait till February the 18th, uh, for the next
official cash rate decision in the past, uh,
the Reserve bank has had eight
or nine official cash rate, um, decisions amongst their
mpss, uh, often December and often January.
Uh, do you have a view as the relatively new chair
and new reserve bank governor,
because I believe it's in your remit, uh, to, in,
to increase the regularity of those
official cash rate decisions?
And so Kiwis don't have to wait almost three months
between November and February, uh,
uh, to hear where we're going?
We, we hear you
And we have reacted.
So the schedule for the 27 year is,
uh, much less shorter gap problem.
Why the board couldn't look to a,
to a schedule change in 26 is those dates are locked into
futures and options transactions
and the international money markets.
Um, we would've loved to have done it sooner,
but we, we, we were advised that we could not make
that change sooner because of other obligations. Mm-hmm.
Mm-hmm. So 2027, what you're saying, there's,
there's April
Much shorter ga ga, much, much
Shorter. Ga Okay. No, it's
encouraging.
Um, I'm just gonna get the final word
to the honorable Barbara Edmonds.
Um, um, just, just wanna understand your,
are you doing any work around the transparency of NPC, um,
you know, around the individual NPC members, um,
basically appearing before the committee or who voted where?
Um, I take, um, Dr.
Deborah Russell's point around, you know, we don't want
to go to a another jurisdiction type role, you know, time
type of environment where there's a bit of lobbying,
but what sort of thinking are you, um, looking at
and is this under act of consideration at the moment, just
around transparency for mpc? Do you
Want I think it's important that Anna has not even
yet met her other NBC members. She's
Unbiased. She's unbiased,
but even, even
before then, there was, obviously this has been in the media
and the last few months,
But I'm happy to, Okay. I'm happy to, oh, sorry.
Yeah, No, I'm just happy to say that, uh,
I really would like to have this discussion with the MPC.
Yeah. Uh, and I think it's very important
that when we look into, um, increasing transparency,
it doesn't, if you look to some monetary policy,
the Reserve Bank is already one of the most transparent
that exists globally,
but I still think it's worth having the discussion
with the MPC.
But when we have that discussion, of course
we will end up in a, in a solution
that is suitable for New Zealand.
We're not just gonna take
whatever other countries are doing.
Mm-hmm. We will have that discussion
and we will end up in something
that is working well for this country.
Right. Thank you. Uh, Barbara,
we have actually got a little bit more time,
and we're not gonna see you till February the 18th.
Uh, I was thinking it was 11 o'clock finish,
but it's actually 10 past 11.
So, uh, uh, Chloe swell.
Yeah. So, um, you've released your first voluntary climate
related disclosure, um, for,
um, outlining your progress and understanding monitoring
and managing climate related risks.
Uh, you say that your inaugural disclosure is focused
primarily on baseline indicators,
the foundational information that the network
for greening the financial system recommended
central banks should provide.
Could you walk us through the findings of that report?
I guess the risks that were outlined,
and I think things that are probably useful
for this committee to not and understand.
Um, Firstly, I think it's our second Okay. Report.
Second report. Second report.
What was the specific question again? Please, Ms.
Could you walk us through the findings of that report
and things that are useful for this committee to know
and understand about the resilience of the institution,
the risks that you've highlighted, and otherwise
We don't really have the resource present.
Okay. I'm sorry, I can go down a different tack then.
Um, so, uh, I, I guess just actually firstly on that,
who should we follow up within your team to get into that?
We can certain follow up question over again. So, yeah.
On, um, the monetary policy statement from last week, um,
there's a nifty little graph in there which refers
particularly to, uh, administered price inflation.
Um, I was wondering, just for sake
of common New Zealanders understanding of
what administered price inflation is, could you unpack
for us what you're actually tracking in that?
Yeah, please. Thanks.
Um, so we are talking there about, um,
prices, uh, that are
less affected, um, more directly affected by, uh,
changes into changes in the monetary policy stance.
Mm-hmm. And they tend to be, uh, those which are prices
that are, are more, uh, structured
or, um, put in place, um,
by taking di different decisions into account versus just
supply and demand, so broader government pricing.
Mm-hmm. And by that I don't just mean central government.
Mm-hmm. I also pick up, uh, local government as well.
Uh, a part of that, um, package, uh,
things like insurance can fit into that package of,
uh, increases as well.
But we were, uh, noting things in particular like, uh,
council rates, uh, vehicle relicensing fees, uh, things of
that kind of nature are what we would reflect in
that third category of administered prices,
which can be more sticky.
Yeah. And I guess just further to that point,
so just in layman's terms administered price inflation is
basically stuff that the government has rather
more direct control over.
Broader. Broader. Okay.
Um, it has
shot up since 2023 based on your graph.
Yes. Why
Price increases.
Yeah. But are there any particular variables?
I think that you, I mean, you alluded
to council rates. Council
Rates is one of The biggest. Yep.
Vehicle licensing fee,
Vehicle licensing fees, insurance, uh, insurance levies.
Mm-hmm. Uh, things of that nature.
Uh, other things that have underpinned that growth
And I understand.
And a hearing that stand up the, with the media subsequent
to the OCR announcement,
and this NPS, uh, that you guys were asked,
or RBNZ was asked about whether if administered inflation,
uh, was not this high,
or rather, that if different government decisions had been
made around administered inflation than the OCR,
you could have cut it faster effectively.
So, so, so what we were referring
to there is non tradables inflation.
Okay. Excluding administered pricing. Mm-hmm.
The increase in MR prices was pretty much back at, uh,
the midpoint of our target.
Yeah.
Okay. Okay. I'm gonna go to Dr. David Wilson.
I seem to have a chance to allow you
to answer my first question, um,
around the alternative monetary policy known
as the large scale asset purchase program.
And could you explain to those that are watching publicly,
what that actually was
and how much it has cost us in terms of policy
and since then, and would we use that again and
Which political party support?
So, large scale asset purchases refers
to when the central bank buys, um,
mainly bonds in the secondary market.
Uh, that was done during the pandemic in many countries, uh,
because both because the markets were not function properly
in many cases, but also to support the economy
because interest rates had been lower to the lower bound.
Um, it's very difficult for me to make an evaluation
as I wasn't here at the time.
Um, I can say that I think that the lessons
from those years is that
this is an, um, unusual monetary policy tool.
Uh, you want to keep it in the overall toolbox,
being very mindful of having the OCR as your primary
monetary policy instrument.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and the other lesson from this period,
if you look across many countries, is you have to, you have
to consider the size of the purchases.
Um, and that has been a lesson that during the pandemic,
many countries are considered to have done, uh,
lar very large, um, asset purchases.
Um, I think the other thing is that
all crisis are different in their nature,
so it's very difficult to say exactly what will be the next
crisis and the best repo response in that case.
But the lesson has been to be careful in using those tools.
Right, right. And it's still in the toolbox?
Yes, it is still in the toolbox.
Um, as, uh, the governor, uh, spoke to,
uh, large scale asset purchases can serve two purposes,
stability, market stability, as well
as implementation of monetary policy.
When you move to the effective lower bound.
Um, I would remind the committee,
we've talked about this a few times over the years.
Um, uh,
the options available here in
New Zealand were extremely limited.
We could not consider a negative OCR
because the banking system was not in position to be able
to implement that.
Um, secondly, a significant piece
of research work was done both by the IMF
and then more subsequently, uh, ourselves following our own,
the wrapup as we call, uh, which was the review around, uh,
the implementation of monetary policy over that period
around the impact of lsap on this economy.
And you need to think about it from two perspectives.
We regularly hear the story around the accounting, uh,
treatment from a mark to market position.
We very rarely hear about the economic impact on the economy
through things like higher taxes mm-hmm.
That were generated through that period.
There are, um, bulletins that can be forwarded to you
that can take you through the dynamics which show the net
effect with actually a positive effect on the economy.
Um, and that there were two aspects at that point in time.
There was both fiscal mm-hmm. And monetary occurring.
So it is the, the outcomes that we saw, which, uh,
in addition to, uh, things that were going on globally
that resulted in a higher level of inflation in this economy
with consequence of many things, not one thing.
And, and chair, if I could, I'd like to add one state
for Dr. Wilson, which is, I'd like to assure the committee
that that exact question is asked in our boardroom.
Yes. And has been asked very many times.
Uh, I call it the war between the economists
and the accountants, but actually in practice,
the one thing I'd love to le leave as a thought is
unless you were there in that room in COVID mm-hmm.
With treasuries forecast of 17% unemployment, I think a lot
of people looking back on LSAT
and the results of lsat positive
and negative, need to just consider
what it would've been like in that room,
making those decisions as a reserve bank, as a government,
both fiscal policy and monetary policy.
This was hard, hard work.
Okay. Thank you. Mr. Can I just give the opportunity
to the governor for any concluding remarks or,
Well, first of all, I'm very pleased to be here
and thank you for your questions
and I look forward to close
collaboration over the coming years.
Okay. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you, governor.
Thank you. Yeah.
Caly Kane, John McDot, Karen, so Angus McGregor, Nick mc,
bribe, and everyone else.
Thank you. Thank you for attending and being engaged.
Members. We're going to break to 1125 just
so you can run a cough. Treasury
And RBNZ did great advice.
That was OI eight at the end of 2019. Start of 20, 20 20.